General object (#1160)
Codecademy/docs: content/general/concepts/object/object.md

---
Title: 'Object'

> Description: 'An object is a data  type, created by the developer, that has properties and methods.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Description: 'An object is associative data that commonly takes the form of a data structure, function, method, variable, or class.'
```

  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> An object is a data type created by the developer that has properties and methods, representing its state and behavior. Objects are often used to represent real-world objects found in everyday life and can interact with other objects and other elements of the program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An **object** is a data type created by the developer that has properties and methods, representing its state and behavior. Objects are often used to represent real-world objects found in everyday life and can interact with other objects and other elements of the program.
```

> An **object** is an instance of a class. It contains the properties and functionalities of its class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An **object** is associative data that commonly takes the form of a data structure, [function](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/function), [method](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/method), variable, or [class](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/class).
```

> Objects provide a structured programming approach and are the basic units of [Oject-Oriented-Programming (OOP)](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/object-oriented-programming). Developers can easily create various identical objects and modify existing ones within the program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Objects provide a structured programming approach and are the core units of [object-oriented-programming (OOP)](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/programming-paradigms/object-oriented-programming). Developers can easily create various identical objects and modify existing ones within the program.
```

Objects also provide [encapsulation](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/encapsulation), meaning that the data within that object is protected from being altered or destroyed by other functions unless explicitly allowed.

## Memory allocation

Declaring an object doesn’t necessarily mean that memory is allocated for it. If an object is initialized with another object, it may just get a reference to the previously created object.

> To allocate memory to an object at runtime, the use of the `new` keyword is needed and depending on the programming language, the memory can be allocated on Heap or Stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allocate memory to an object at [runtime](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/runtime), the use of the `new` keyword is needed and, depending on the programming language, the memory can be allocated to a heap or stack.
```

> ## Class and Object Example in Java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Java Example
```

> In Java, an object is created from a class. The class is a blueprint for creating objects and it's required in classical OO/UML (C++/Java/C# etc.) objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Java, [classes](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/classes) are the blueprints for creating objects, which is required in object-orientation/unified modeling language (OO/UML).

The following snippet is an example of a defined class being used to instantiate new objects (instances of that class):
```

```java

> // Creating the Employee class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Employee.java
```

class Employee {

> 
>   // state or field
>   int id;
>   String firstName;
>   String lastName;
>   char middleInitial;
>   float years;
> 
>   // behavior or method
>   void cookingBread() {
>     System.out.println("Cooking some delicious bread.");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // State or field
  int id;
  String firstName;
  String lastName;
  char middleInitial;
  float years;

  // Behavior or method
  void cookingBread() {
    System.out.println("Cooking some delicious bread.");
```

Employee gene = new Employee();
```

> In the example above, five different objects were created from the class `Employee`. An object is called an instance of a class. `Tina`, `Louise`, etc, are objects of the class `Employee`. The `new` keyword has been used along with the constructor of the class to create the object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above, the `new` keyword was used to create five object instances of the `Employee` class according to the class constructor.
```

> ## Access fields and methods of a Class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Accessing Fields and Methods
```

> By using the name of the objects, along with the `.` operator, it's possible to access members of a class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since objects are class instances in Java, they can use the `.` operator to access fields and methods in a class.
```

```java

> // Creating the Car class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Car.java
```

public class Car {

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  // state or field
  int numberOfDoors;
  String color;
  String brand;
  boolean isOn;

>   // constructor declaration of class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Constructor declaration of class
```

  public Car(int numberOfDoors, String color, String brand, boolean isOn) {
    this.numberOfDoors = numberOfDoors;
    this.color = color;
    this.brand = brand;
    this.isOn = isOn;
  }

>   // behavior or method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Behavior or method
```

  void turnOn() {
    isOn = true;
    System.out.println("The car has started? " + isOn);
  }
}

> // Creating an object from the Car class

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Create object or class instance
```

Car mercedes = new Car(5, "black", "mercedes", true);

// Access state

> System.out.println(mercedes.numberOfDoors) // Output: 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
System.out.println(mercedes.numberOfDoors)
```

// Access behavior

> System.out.println(mercedes.turnOn()); // sets the isOn variable to true and prints the output: The car has started? True

Reviewer: ```suggestion
System.out.println(mercedes.turnOn());
```

```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In the snippet above, a new `Car` object called `mercedes` is created with its `isOn` field set to `true`. When the `.turnOn()` is invoked with the `mercedes` object and its `numberOfDoors` field is accessed, the following is printed:

```

And then let's add a \```shell snippet of the output that looks like this:

```shell
5
The car has started? True
```

> ## Types of objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Types of Objects
```

Objects can be categorized based on what they do or how they work based on [design patterns](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/creational-design-patterns), which represent repeatable solutions to common tasks or problems in programming.

> Patterns themselves are **not** objects but are used to develop objects that solve general problems during software development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Patterns themselves are not objects but are used to develop objects that solve general problems during software development.
```
